Cancer Coloretal
1. Multi-class texture analysis in colorectal cancer histology (primeiro artigo) - 2016
Automatic recognition of different tissue types in histological images is an essential part in the digital
pathology toolbox. Texture analysis is commonly used to address this problem; mainly in the context
of estimating the tumour/stroma ratio on histological samples. However, although histological images
typically contain more than two tissue types, only few studies have addressed the multi-class problem.
For colorectal cancer, one of the most prevalent tumour types, there are in fact no published results
on multiclass texture separation. In this paper we present a new dataset of 5,000 histological images
of human colorectal cancer including eight different types of tissue. We used this set to assess the
classification performance of a wide range of texture descriptors and classifiers. As a result, we found an
optimal classification strategy that markedly outperformed traditional methods, improving the state
of the art for tumour-stroma separation from 96.9% to 98.6% accuracy and setting a new standard for
multiclass tissue separation (87.4% accuracy for eight classes). We make our dataset of histological
images publicly available under a Creative Commons license and encourage other researchers to use it
as a benchmark for their studies.

2. The importance of stain normalization in colorectal tissue classification with convolutional networks - 2017
The development of reliable imaging biomarkers for the analysis of colorectal cancer (CRC) in hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained histopathology images requires an accurate and reproducible classification of the main tissue components in the image. In this paper, we propose a system for CRC tissue classification based on convolutional networks (ConvNets). We investigate the importance of stain normalization in tissue classification of CRC tissue samples in H&E-stained images. Furthermore, we report the performance of ConvNets on a cohort of rectal cancer samples and on an independent publicly available dataset of colorectal H&E images.

3. Improved opponent color local binary patterns: an effective local image descriptor for color texture classification - 2017
Texture classification plays a major role in many computer vision applications. Local binary patterns (LBP) encoding schemes have largely been proven to be very effective for this task. Improved LBP (ILBP) are conceptually simple, easy to implement, and highly effective LBP variants based on a point-to-average thresholding scheme instead of a point-to-point one. We propose the use of this encoding scheme for extracting intra- and interchannel features for color texture classification. We experimentally evaluated the resulting improved opponent color LBP alone and in concatenation with the ILBP of the local color contrast map on a set of image classification tasks over 9 datasets of generic color textures and 11 datasets of biomedical textures. The proposed approach outperformed other grayscale and color LBP variants in nearly all the datasets considered and proved competitive even against image features from last generation convolutional neural networks, particularly for the classification of biomedical images.

4. Histopathological image classification with bilinear convolutional neural networks - 2017
The computer-aided quantitative analysis for histopathological images has attracted considerable attention. The stain decomposition on histopathological images is usually recommended to address the issue of co-localization or aliasing of tissue substances. Although the convolutional neural networks (CNN) is a popular deep learning algorithm for various tasks on histopathological image analysis, it is only directly performed on histopathological images without considering stain decomposition. The bilinear CNN (BCNN) is a new CNN model for fine-grained classification. BCNN consists of two CNNs, whose convolutional-layer outputs are multiplied with outer product at each spatial location. In this work, we propose a novel BCNN-based method for classification of histopathological images, which first decomposes histopathological images into hematoxylin and eosin stain components, and then perform BCNN on the decomposed images to fuse and improve the feature representation performance. The experimental results on the colorectal cancer histopathological image dataset with eight classes indicate that the proposed BCNN-based algorithm is superior to the traditional CNN.

5. Dimensionality Reduction Strategies for CNN-Based Classification of Histopathological Images - 2018
Features from pre-trained Convolutional Neural Newtorks (CNN) have proved to be effective for many tasks such as object, scene and face recognition. Compared with traditional, hand-designed image descriptors, CNN-based features produce higher-dimensional feature vectors. In specific applications where the number of samples may be limited – as in the case of histopatological images – high dimensionality could potentially cause overfitting and redundancy in the information to be processed and stored. To overcome these potential problems feature reduction methods can be applied, at the cost of a moderate reduction in the discrimination accuracy. In this paper we investigate dimensionality reduction schemes for CNN-based features applied to computer-assisted classification of histopathological images. The purpose of this study is to find the best trade-off between accuracy and dimensionality. Specifically, we test two well-known techniques (i.e.: Principal Component Analysis and Gaussian Random Projection) and propose a novel reduction strategy based on the cross-correlation between the components of the feature vector. The results show that it is possible to reduce CNN-based features by a high ratio with a moderate decrease in accuracy with respect to the original values.

6. Predicting survival from colorectal cancer histology slides using deep learning: A retrospective multicenter study - 2019
For virtually every patient with colorectal cancer (CRC), hematoxylin–eosin (HE)–stained tissue slides are available. These images contain quantitative information, which is not routinely used to objectively extract prognostic biomarkers. In the present study, we investigated whether deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) can extract prognosticators directly from these widely available images.

7. Automatic classification of colorectal and prostatic histologic tumor images using multiscale multispectral local binary pattern texture features and stacked generalization - 2018
This paper proposes a new multispectral multiscale local binary pattern feature extraction method for automatic classification of colorectal and prostatic tumor biopsies samples. A multilevel stacked generalization classification technique is also proposed and the key idea of the paper considers a grade diagnostic problem rather than a simple malignant versus tumorous tissue problem using the concept of multispectral imagery in both the visible and near infrared spectra. To validate the proposed algorithm performances, a comparative study against related works using multispectral imagery is conducted including an evaluation on three different multiclass datasets of multispectral histology images: two representing images of colorectal biopsies - one dataset was acquired in the visible spectrum while the second captures near-infrared spectra. The proposed algorithm achieves an accuracy of 99.6% on the different datasets. The results obtained demonstrate the advantages of infrared wavelengths to capture more efficiently the most discriminative information. The results obtained show that our proposed algorithm outperforms other similar methods.

8. Deep Learning for Histopathological Image Analysis: Towards Computerized Diagnosis on Cancers - 2017
Automated detection and segmentation of histologic primitives are critical steps for developing computer-aided diagnosis and prognosis system on histopathological tissue specimens. For a number of cancers, the clinical cancer grading system is highly correlated with the pathomic features of histologic primitives that appreciated from histopathological images. However, automated detection and segmentation of histologic primitives is pretty challenged because of the complicity and high density of histologic data. Therefore, there is a high demand for developing intelligent and computational image analysis tools for digital pathology images. Recently there have been interests in the application of “Deep Learning” strategies for classification and analysis of big image data. Histopathology, given its size and complexity, represents an excellent use case for application of deep learning strategies. In this chapter, we present deep learning based approaches for two challenged tasks in histological image analysis: (1) Automated nuclear atypia scoring (NAS) on breast histopathology. We present a Multi-Resolution Convolutional Network (MR-CN) with Plurality Voting (MR-CN-PV) model for automated NAS. MR-CN-PV consists of three Single-Resolution Convolutional Network (SR-CN) with Majority Voting (SR-CN-MV) model for getting independent NAS. MR-CN-PV combines three scores via plurality voting for getting final score. (2) Epithelial (EP) and stromal (ST) tissues discrimination. The work utilized a pixel-wise Convolutional Network (CN-PI) based segmentation model for automated EP and ST tissues discrimination. We present experiments on two challenged datasets. For automated NAS, the MR-CN-PV model was evaluated on MITOS-ATYPIA-14 Challenge dataset. MR-CN-PV model got 67 score which was placed the second comparing with the scores of other five teams. The proposed CN-PI model outperformed patch-wise CN (CN-PA) models in discriminating EP and ST tissues on a breast histological images.

9. Classification of colorectal cancer based on the association of multidimensional and multiresolution features - 2019
Colorectal cancer is one of the most common types of cancer according to worldwide incidences statistics. The correct diagnosis of this lesion leads to the indication of the most adequate treatments for cancer-affected patients. The diagnosis is made through the visual analysis of tissue samples by pathologists. However, this analysis is susceptible to intra- and inter-pathologists variability in addition to being a complex and time-consuming task. To deal with these challenges, image processing methods are developed for application on histological images obtained through the digitization of the tissue samples. To do so, feature extraction and classification techniques are investigated to aid pathologists and make it possible a faster and more objective diagnosis definition. Therefore, in this work, we propose a method that associates multidimensional fractal techniques, curvelet transforms and Haralick descriptors for the study and pattern recognition of colorectal cancer, which not yet explored in the Literature. The proposed method considered a feature selection approach and different classification techniques for evaluating associations, such as decision tree, random forest, support vector machine, naive Bayes, k*, and a polynomial method. This strategy allowed for more precise interpretations regarding the best associations for the separation of groups concerning histological images of colorectal cancer. The proposal was tested on colorectal images from two distinct datasets commonly investigated in the Literature. The best result was reached with features based mainly on lacunarity and percolation obtained from curvelet sub-images, using a polynomial classifier. The tests were evaluated by applying the 10-fold cross-validation method and the result was 0.994 of AUC, which is a relevant contribution to the Literature of pattern recognition of colorectal cancer. The obtained performance with a detailed analysis involving different types of features and classifiers are important contributions for pathologists, specialists interested in the study of this cancer and histological image processing researchers, which aim to develop the clinically applicable computational techniques.

Breast Cancer
1. 
2. 

Imagens Histológicas (Kimia)
1. A Comparative Study of CNN, BoVW and LBP for Classification of Histopathological Images (primeiro artigo) - 2017
2. Comparing LBP, HOG and Deep Features for Classification of Histopathology Images - 2018
